# Handwriting recognition revisited: the code

Let's implement the ideas we've discussed in this chapter. We'll develop a new program, [network2.py](https://github.com/mnielsen/neural-networks-and-deep-learning/blob/master/src/network2.py), which is an improved version of the program [network.py](https://github.com/mnielsen/neural-networks-and-deep-learning/blob/master/src/network.py) we developed in Chapter 1. If you haven't looked at network.py in a while then you may find it helpful to spend a few minutes quickly reading over the earlier discussion. It's only 74 lines of code, and is easily understood.

As was the case in network.py, the star of network2.py is the Network class, which we use to represent our neural networks. We initialize an instance of Network with a list of sizes for the respective layers in the network, and a choice for the cost to use, defaulting to the cross-entropy:

```py
class Network(object):

    def __init__(self, sizes, cost=CrossEntropyCost):
        self.num_layers = len(sizes)
        self.sizes = sizes
        self.default_weight_initializer()
        self.cost=cost
```

The first couple of lines of the __init__ method are the same as in `network.py`, and are pretty self-explanatory. But the next two lines are new, and we need to understand what they're doing in detail.

Let's start by examining the `default_weight_initializer` method. This makes use of our [new and improved approach](http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap3.html#weight_initialization) to weight initialization. As we've seen, in that approach the weights input to a neuron are initialized as Gaussian random variables with mean 0 and standard deviation 1 divided by the square root of the number of connections input to the neuron. Also in this method we'll initialize the biases, using Gaussian random variables with mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Here's the code:

```py
def default_weight_initializer(self):
    self.biases = [np.random.randn(y, 1) for y in self.sizes[1:]]
    self.weights = [np.random.randn(y, x)/np.sqrt(x) 
                    for x, y in zip(self.sizes[:-1], self.sizes[1:])]
```

To understand the code, it may help to recall that np is the Numpy library for doing linear algebra. We'll `import` Numpy at the beginning of our program. Also, notice that we don't initialize any biases for the first layer of neurons. We avoid doing this because the first layer is an input layer, and so any biases would not be used. We did exactly the same thing in `network.py`.

Complementing the `default_weight_initializer` we'll also include a `large_weight_initializer` method. This method initializes the weights and biases using the old approach from Chapter 1, with both weights and biases initialized as Gaussian random variables with mean 0 and standard deviation 1. The code is, of course, only a tiny bit different from the `default_weight_initializer`:

```py
def large_weight_initializer(self):
    self.biases = [np.random.randn(y, 1) for y in self.sizes[1:]]
    self.weights = [np.random.randn(y, x) 
                    for x, y in zip(self.sizes[:-1], self.sizes[1:])]
```

I've included the large_weight_initializer method mostly as a convenience to make it easier to compare the results in this chapter to those in Chapter 1. I can't think of many practical situations where I would recommend using it!

The second new thing in Network's __init__ method is that we now initialize a cost attribute. To understand how that works, let's look at the class we use to represent the cross-entropy cost (If you're not familiar with Python's static methods you can ignore the @staticmethod decorators, and just treat fn and delta as ordinary methods. If you're curious about details, all @staticmethod does is tell the Python interpreter that the method which follows doesn't depend on the object in any way. That's why self isn't passed as a parameter to the fn and delta methods.)

```py
class CrossEntropyCost(object):

    @staticmethod
    def fn(a, y):
        return np.sum(np.nan_to_num(-y*np.log(a)-(1-y)*np.log(1-a)))

    @staticmethod
    def delta(z, a, y):
        return (a-y)
```

Let's break this down. The first thing to observe is that even though the cross-entropy is, mathematically speaking, a function, we've implemented it as a Python class, not a Python function. Why have I made that choice? The reason is that the cost plays two different roles in our network. The obvious role is that it's a measure of how well an output activation, a, matches the desired output, y. This role is captured by the `CrossEntropyCost.fn` method. (Note, by the way, that the `np.nan_to_num` call inside `CrossEntropyCost.fn` ensures that Numpy deals correctly with the log of numbers very close to zero.) But there's also a second way the cost function enters our network. Recall from Chapter 2 that when running the backpropagation algorithm we need to compute the network's output error, $δ^L$. The form of the output error depends on the choice of cost function: different cost function, different form for the output error. For the cross-entropy the output error is, as we saw in Equation (66),
$$
  \delta^L = a^L-y.
  \tag{99}
$$

For this reason we define a second method, `CrossEntropyCost.delta`, whose purpose is to tell our network how to compute the output error. And then we bundle these two methods up into a single class containing everything our networks need to know about the cost function.

In a similar way, `network2.py` also contains a class to represent the quadratic cost function. This is included for comparison with the results of Chapter 1, since going forward we'll mostly use the cross entropy. The code is just below. The `QuadraticCost.fn` method is a straightforward computation of the quadratic cost associated to the actual output, a, and the desired output, `y`. The value returned by `QuadraticCost.delta` is based on the expression (30) for the output error for the quadratic cost, which we derived back in Chapter 2.

```py
class QuadraticCost(object):

    @staticmethod
    def fn(a, y):
        return 0.5*np.linalg.norm(a-y)**2

    @staticmethod
    def delta(z, a, y):
        return (a-y) * sigmoid_prime(z)
```

We've now understood the main differences between `network2.py` and `network.py`. It's all pretty simple stuff. There are a number of smaller changes, which I'll discuss below, including the implementation of L2 regularization. Before getting to that, let's look at the complete code for `network2.py`. You don't need to read all the code in detail, but it is worth understanding the broad structure, and in particular reading the documentation strings, so you understand what each piece of the program is doing. Of course, you're also welcome to delve as deeply as you wish! If you get lost, you may wish to continue reading the prose below, and return to the code later. Anyway, here's the code:

```py
"""network2.py
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An improved version of network.py, implementing the stochastic
gradient descent learning algorithm for a feedforward neural network.
Improvements include the addition of the cross-entropy cost function,
regularization, and better initialization of network weights.  Note
that I have focused on making the code simple, easily readable, and
easily modifiable.  It is not optimized, and omits many desirable
features.

"""

#### Libraries
# Standard library
import json
import random
import sys

# Third-party libraries
import numpy as np


#### Define the quadratic and cross-entropy cost functions

class QuadraticCost(object):

    @staticmethod
    def fn(a, y):
        """Return the cost associated with an output ``a`` and desired output
        ``y``.

        """
        return 0.5*np.linalg.norm(a-y)**2

    @staticmethod
    def delta(z, a, y):
        """Return the error delta from the output layer."""
        return (a-y) * sigmoid_prime(z)


class CrossEntropyCost(object):

    @staticmethod
    def fn(a, y):
        """Return the cost associated with an output ``a`` and desired output
        ``y``.  Note that np.nan_to_num is used to ensure numerical
        stability.  In particular, if both ``a`` and ``y`` have a 1.0
        in the same slot, then the expression (1-y)*np.log(1-a)
        returns nan.  The np.nan_to_num ensures that that is converted
        to the correct value (0.0).

        """
        return np.sum(np.nan_to_num(-y*np.log(a)-(1-y)*np.log(1-a)))

    @staticmethod
    def delta(z, a, y):
        """Return the error delta from the output layer.  Note that the
        parameter ``z`` is not used by the method.  It is included in
        the method's parameters in order to make the interface
        consistent with the delta method for other cost classes.

        """
        return (a-y)


#### Main Network class
class Network(object):

    def __init__(self, sizes, cost=CrossEntropyCost):
        """The list ``sizes`` contains the number of neurons in the respective
        layers of the network.  For example, if the list was [2, 3, 1]
        then it would be a three-layer network, with the first layer
        containing 2 neurons, the second layer 3 neurons, and the
        third layer 1 neuron.  The biases and weights for the network
        are initialized randomly, using
        ``self.default_weight_initializer`` (see docstring for that
        method).

        """
        self.num_layers = len(sizes)
        self.sizes = sizes
        self.default_weight_initializer()
        self.cost=cost

    def default_weight_initializer(self):
        """Initialize each weight using a Gaussian distribution with mean 0
        and standard deviation 1 over the square root of the number of
        weights connecting to the same neuron.  Initialize the biases
        using a Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and standard
        deviation 1.

        Note that the first layer is assumed to be an input layer, and
        by convention we won't set any biases for those neurons, since
        biases are only ever used in computing the outputs from later
        layers.

        """
        self.biases = [np.random.randn(y, 1) for y in self.sizes[1:]]
        self.weights = [np.random.randn(y, x)/np.sqrt(x)
                        for x, y in zip(self.sizes[:-1], self.sizes[1:])]

    def large_weight_initializer(self):
        """Initialize the weights using a Gaussian distribution with mean 0
        and standard deviation 1.  Initialize the biases using a
        Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation 1.

        Note that the first layer is assumed to be an input layer, and
        by convention we won't set any biases for those neurons, since
        biases are only ever used in computing the outputs from later
        layers.

        This weight and bias initializer uses the same approach as in
        Chapter 1, and is included for purposes of comparison.  It
        will usually be better to use the default weight initializer
        instead.

        """
        self.biases = [np.random.randn(y, 1) for y in self.sizes[1:]]
        self.weights = [np.random.randn(y, x)
                        for x, y in zip(self.sizes[:-1], self.sizes[1:])]

    def feedforward(self, a):
        """Return the output of the network if ``a`` is input."""
        for b, w in zip(self.biases, self.weights):
            a = sigmoid(np.dot(w, a)+b)
        return a

    def SGD(self, training_data, epochs, mini_batch_size, eta,
            lmbda = 0.0,
            evaluation_data=None,
            monitor_evaluation_cost=False,
            monitor_evaluation_accuracy=False,
            monitor_training_cost=False,
            monitor_training_accuracy=False):
        """Train the neural network using mini-batch stochastic gradient
        descent.  The ``training_data`` is a list of tuples ``(x, y)``
        representing the training inputs and the desired outputs.  The
        other non-optional parameters are self-explanatory, as is the
        regularization parameter ``lmbda``.  The method also accepts
        ``evaluation_data``, usually either the validation or test
        data.  We can monitor the cost and accuracy on either the
        evaluation data or the training data, by setting the
        appropriate flags.  The method returns a tuple containing four
        lists: the (per-epoch) costs on the evaluation data, the
        accuracies on the evaluation data, the costs on the training
        data, and the accuracies on the training data.  All values are
        evaluated at the end of each training epoch.  So, for example,
        if we train for 30 epochs, then the first element of the tuple
        will be a 30-element list containing the cost on the
        evaluation data at the end of each epoch. Note that the lists
        are empty if the corresponding flag is not set.

        """
        if evaluation_data: n_data = len(evaluation_data)
        n = len(training_data)
        evaluation_cost, evaluation_accuracy = [], []
        training_cost, training_accuracy = [], []
        for j in xrange(epochs):
            random.shuffle(training_data)
            mini_batches = [
                training_data[k:k+mini_batch_size]
                for k in xrange(0, n, mini_batch_size)]
            for mini_batch in mini_batches:
                self.update_mini_batch(
                    mini_batch, eta, lmbda, len(training_data))
            print "Epoch %s training complete" % j
            if monitor_training_cost:
                cost = self.total_cost(training_data, lmbda)
                training_cost.append(cost)
                print "Cost on training data: {}".format(cost)
            if monitor_training_accuracy:
                accuracy = self.accuracy(training_data, convert=True)
                training_accuracy.append(accuracy)
                print "Accuracy on training data: {} / {}".format(
                    accuracy, n)
            if monitor_evaluation_cost:
                cost = self.total_cost(evaluation_data, lmbda, convert=True)
                evaluation_cost.append(cost)
                print "Cost on evaluation data: {}".format(cost)
            if monitor_evaluation_accuracy:
                accuracy = self.accuracy(evaluation_data)
                evaluation_accuracy.append(accuracy)
                print "Accuracy on evaluation data: {} / {}".format(
                    self.accuracy(evaluation_data), n_data)
            print
        return evaluation_cost, evaluation_accuracy, \
            training_cost, training_accuracy

    def update_mini_batch(self, mini_batch, eta, lmbda, n):
        """Update the network's weights and biases by applying gradient
        descent using backpropagation to a single mini batch.  The
        ``mini_batch`` is a list of tuples ``(x, y)``, ``eta`` is the
        learning rate, ``lmbda`` is the regularization parameter, and
        ``n`` is the total size of the training data set.

        """
        nabla_b = [np.zeros(b.shape) for b in self.biases]
        nabla_w = [np.zeros(w.shape) for w in self.weights]
        for x, y in mini_batch:
            delta_nabla_b, delta_nabla_w = self.backprop(x, y)
            nabla_b = [nb+dnb for nb, dnb in zip(nabla_b, delta_nabla_b)]
            nabla_w = [nw+dnw for nw, dnw in zip(nabla_w, delta_nabla_w)]
        self.weights = [(1-eta*(lmbda/n))*w-(eta/len(mini_batch))*nw
                        for w, nw in zip(self.weights, nabla_w)]
        self.biases = [b-(eta/len(mini_batch))*nb
                       for b, nb in zip(self.biases, nabla_b)]

    def backprop(self, x, y):
        """Return a tuple ``(nabla_b, nabla_w)`` representing the
        gradient for the cost function C_x.  ``nabla_b`` and
        ``nabla_w`` are layer-by-layer lists of numpy arrays, similar
        to ``self.biases`` and ``self.weights``."""
        nabla_b = [np.zeros(b.shape) for b in self.biases]
        nabla_w = [np.zeros(w.shape) for w in self.weights]
        # feedforward
        activation = x
        activations = [x] # list to store all the activations, layer by layer
        zs = [] # list to store all the z vectors, layer by layer
        for b, w in zip(self.biases, self.weights):
            z = np.dot(w, activation)+b
            zs.append(z)
            activation = sigmoid(z)
            activations.append(activation)
        # backward pass
        delta = (self.cost).delta(zs[-1], activations[-1], y)
        nabla_b[-1] = delta
        nabla_w[-1] = np.dot(delta, activations[-2].transpose())
        # Note that the variable l in the loop below is used a little
        # differently to the notation in Chapter 2 of the book.  Here,
        # l = 1 means the last layer of neurons, l = 2 is the
        # second-last layer, and so on.  It's a renumbering of the
        # scheme in the book, used here to take advantage of the fact
        # that Python can use negative indices in lists.
        for l in xrange(2, self.num_layers):
            z = zs[-l]
            sp = sigmoid_prime(z)
            delta = np.dot(self.weights[-l+1].transpose(), delta) * sp
            nabla_b[-l] = delta
            nabla_w[-l] = np.dot(delta, activations[-l-1].transpose())
        return (nabla_b, nabla_w)

    def accuracy(self, data, convert=False):
        """Return the number of inputs in ``data`` for which the neural
        network outputs the correct result. The neural network's
        output is assumed to be the index of whichever neuron in the
        final layer has the highest activation.

        The flag ``convert`` should be set to False if the data set is
        validation or test data (the usual case), and to True if the
        data set is the training data. The need for this flag arises
        due to differences in the way the results ``y`` are
        represented in the different data sets.  In particular, it
        flags whether we need to convert between the different
        representations.  It may seem strange to use different
        representations for the different data sets.  Why not use the
        same representation for all three data sets?  It's done for
        efficiency reasons -- the program usually evaluates the cost
        on the training data and the accuracy on other data sets.
        These are different types of computations, and using different
        representations speeds things up.  More details on the
        representations can be found in
        mnist_loader.load_data_wrapper.

        """
        if convert:
            results = [(np.argmax(self.feedforward(x)), np.argmax(y))
                       for (x, y) in data]
        else:
            results = [(np.argmax(self.feedforward(x)), y)
                        for (x, y) in data]
        return sum(int(x == y) for (x, y) in results)

    def total_cost(self, data, lmbda, convert=False):
        """Return the total cost for the data set ``data``.  The flag
        ``convert`` should be set to False if the data set is the
        training data (the usual case), and to True if the data set is
        the validation or test data.  See comments on the similar (but
        reversed) convention for the ``accuracy`` method, above.
        """
        cost = 0.0
        for x, y in data:
            a = self.feedforward(x)
            if convert: y = vectorized_result(y)
            cost += self.cost.fn(a, y)/len(data)
        cost += 0.5*(lmbda/len(data))*sum(
            np.linalg.norm(w)**2 for w in self.weights)
        return cost

    def save(self, filename):
        """Save the neural network to the file ``filename``."""
        data = {"sizes": self.sizes,
                "weights": [w.tolist() for w in self.weights],
                "biases": [b.tolist() for b in self.biases],
                "cost": str(self.cost.__name__)}
        f = open(filename, "w")
        json.dump(data, f)
        f.close()

#### Loading a Network
def load(filename):
    """Load a neural network from the file ``filename``.  Returns an
    instance of Network.

    """
    f = open(filename, "r")
    data = json.load(f)
    f.close()
    cost = getattr(sys.modules[__name__], data["cost"])
    net = Network(data["sizes"], cost=cost)
    net.weights = [np.array(w) for w in data["weights"]]
    net.biases = [np.array(b) for b in data["biases"]]
    return net

#### Miscellaneous functions
def vectorized_result(j):
    """Return a 10-dimensional unit vector with a 1.0 in the j'th position
    and zeroes elsewhere.  This is used to convert a digit (0...9)
    into a corresponding desired output from the neural network.

    """
    e = np.zeros((10, 1))
    e[j] = 1.0
    return e

def sigmoid(z):
    """The sigmoid function."""
    return 1.0/(1.0+np.exp(-z))

def sigmoid_prime(z):
    """Derivative of the sigmoid function."""
    return sigmoid(z)*(1-sigmoid(z))
```

One of the more interesting changes in the code is to include L2 regularization. Although this is a major conceptual change, it's so trivial to implement that it's easy to miss in the code. For the most part it just involves passing the parameter `lmbda` to various methods, notably the `Network.SGD` method. The real work is done in a single line of the program, the fourth-last line of the `Network.update_mini_batch` method. That's where we modify the gradient descent update rule to include weight decay. But although the modification is tiny, it has a big impact on results!

This is, by the way, common when implementing new techniques in neural networks. We've spent thousands of words discussing regularization. It's conceptually quite subtle and difficult to understand. And yet it was trivial to add to our program! It occurs surprisingly often that sophisticated techniques can be implemented with small changes to code.

Another small but important change to our code is the addition of several optional flags to the stochastic gradient descent method, `Network.SGD`. These flags make it possible to monitor the cost and accuracy either on the `training_data` or on a set of evaluation_data which can be passed to `Network.SGD`. We've used these flags often earlier in the chapter, but let me give an example of how it works, just to remind you:

```
>>> import mnist_loader
>>> training_data, validation_data, test_data = \
... mnist_loader.load_data_wrapper()
>>> import network2
>>> net = network2.Network([784, 30, 10], cost=network2.CrossEntropyCost)
>>> net.SGD(training_data, 30, 10, 0.5,
... lmbda = 5.0,
... evaluation_data=validation_data,
... monitor_evaluation_accuracy=True,
... monitor_evaluation_cost=True,
... monitor_training_accuracy=True,
... monitor_training_cost=True)
```

Here, we're setting the `evaluation_data` to be the `validation_data`. But we could also have monitored performance on the `test_data` or any other data set. We also have four flags telling us to monitor the cost and accuracy on both the `evaluation_data` and the `training_data`. Those flags are `False` by default, but they've been turned on here in order to monitor our `Network`'s performance. Furthermore, `etwork2.py`'s `Network.SGD` method returns a four-element tuple representing the results of the monitoring. We can use this as follows:

```
>>> evaluation_cost, evaluation_accuracy, 
... training_cost, training_accuracy = net.SGD(training_data, 30, 10, 0.5,
... lmbda = 5.0,
... evaluation_data=validation_data,
... monitor_evaluation_accuracy=True,
... monitor_evaluation_cost=True,
... monitor_training_accuracy=True,
... monitor_training_cost=True)
```

So, for example, `evaluation_cost` will be a 30-element list containing the cost on the evaluation data at the end of each epoch. This sort of information is extremely useful in understanding a network's behaviour. It can, for example, be used to draw graphs showing how the network learns over time. Indeed, that's exactly how I constructed all the graphs earlier in the chapter. Note, however, that if any of the monitoring flags are not set, then the corresponding element in the tuple will be the empty list.

Other additions to the code include a `Network.save` method, to save `Network` objects to disk, and a function to load them back in again later. Note that the saving and loading is done using JSON, not Python's `pickle` or `cPickle` modules, which are the usual way we save and load objects to and from disk in Python. Using JSON requires more code than `pickle` or `cPickle` would. To understand why I've used JSON, imagine that at some time in the future we decided to change our `Network` class to allow neurons other than sigmoid neurons. To implement that change we'd most likely change the attributes defined in the `Network.__init__` method. If we've simply pickled the objects that would cause our load function to fail. Using JSON to do the serialization explicitly makes it easy to ensure that old `Networks` will still `load`.

There are many other minor changes in the code for `network2.py`, but they're all simple variations on `network.py`. The net result is to expand our 74-line program to a far more capable 152 lines.

# Problems

 - Modify the code above to implement L1 regularization, and use L1 regularization to classify MNIST digits using a 30 hidden neuron network. Can you find a regularization parameter that enables you to do better than running unregularized?
 - Take a look at the `Network.cost_derivative` method in [network.py](https://github.com/mnielsen/neural-networks-and-deep-learning/blob/master/src/network.py). That method was written for the quadratic cost. How would you rewrite the method for the cross-entropy cost? Can you think of a problem that might arise in the cross-entropy version? In `network2.py` we've eliminated the `Network.cost_derivative` method entirely, instead incorporating its functionality into the `CrossEntropyCost.delta` method. How does this solve the problem you've just identified?